spec: add plugin conventions and remove outdated information from the plugin spec (#292)
notaryproject/notaryproject: specs/plugin-extensibility.md

* Plugin executable file MUST follow the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}`. On `windows` OS, the file extension `.exe` is REQUIRED.
* The plugin distribution format MUST be either .zip, .tar.gz, or a single plugin executable file. If the release format is _single plugin executable file_, it is highly recommended to compress it into an archive for installation efficiency consideration.
* If the archive format is `.zip` or `.tar.gz`, there MUST be one and only one plugin executable file within each archive.
* Plugin publisher SHOULD provide SHA256 checksum for each released archive and executable file if they want to enable users to install a plugin from an `https` URL.
* The plugin archive MAY contain License files. Also, it's recommended to include licenses in the archive.

For example, an archive of a Notation plugin `helloworld` for Linux AMD64 machine `notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.zip` includes these files:

```
notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.tar.gz
├── notation-helloworld (required)
├── LICENSE (optional)

> └── Dependencies (optional)

Author: Updated

  * A plugin MUST support a single plugin contract version, per major version.

Notation will invoke plugins as executable, pass parameters using command line arguments, and use standard IO streams to pass request/response payloads.

### Package a plugin

Plugin publisher SHOULD follow these conventions to package and distribute plugin files:

* The file formats supported by Notation include `.zip`, `.tar.gz`, and single plugin executable file. It is highly recommended to package the single plugin executable file into an archive for installation security and efficiency consideration
* Plugin executable file MUST follow the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}` 
* Notation supports installing a plugin from an `https` URL or from a file in the filesystem
* If the archive format is `.zip` or `.tar.gz`, there MUST be one and only one plugin executable file within each archive
* Plugin publisher SHOULD provide SHA256 checksum for each released archive 
* If the plugin has external dependencies, plugin publisher MUST include them in the archive
* License file is optional but it's recommended to be included in the archive

> For example, an archive of a Notation plugin `helloworld` for Linux AMD64 machine `notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.zip` includes these files:

Reviewer: Maybe we can give an example for plugin executable on Windows, since `.exe` extension is required.

Author: File extension requirement of the single executable file has been articulated at this [line](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/pull/292/files#diff-3ad0d4bca93e75a8cdf8d94a4173d43d5d896320d00c52622244376c4779dab6R74). So it's not necessary to mention this requirement again.

  * Notation MUST work with a plugin that implements a matching or lower minor version of the plugin contract. Notation SHALL NOT support using a plugin with higher version of plugin contract.
  * A plugin MUST support a single plugin contract version, per major version.

> Notation will invoke plugins as executable, pass parameters using command line arguments, and use standard IO streams to pass request/response payloads. This mechanism is used as Go language (used to develop [Notation Go library](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-go)) does not have a [in built support](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/19282) to load and execute plugins that works across OS platforms. Other mechanisms like gRPC require every plugin to be implemented as a service/daemon.

Reviewer 2: Why did we remove this info? its still true.

Author: I will rely on notation-go maintainers @notaryproject/notaryproject-notation-go-maintainers to help confirm and answer this question.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @priteshbandi , it is not necessary to remove the information, it gives more insight to the customers. Cutting it off is probably going to bring more questions.

Author: Updated

> ### Package a plugin

Author: If we use "release a plugin", it means we should even document how to versioning a plugin. But we only have conventions on how to package a plugin for distribution to meet the requirements of `notation plugin installation`. The sub-title **Packaging Plugin for Distribution** proposed by @priteshbandi sounds good to me. How do you think about this proposal?

> Plugin publisher SHOULD follow these conventions to package and distribute plugin files:

Author: Same as the comment above https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/pull/292#discussion_r1471544005

* The file formats supported by Notation include `.zip`, `.tar.gz`, and single plugin executable file. It is highly recommended to package the single plugin executable file into an archive for installation security and efficiency consideration
* Plugin executable file MUST follow the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}` 
* Notation supports installing a plugin from an `https` URL or from a file in the filesystem
* If the archive format is `.zip` or `.tar.gz`, there MUST be one and only one plugin executable file within each archive
* Plugin publisher SHOULD provide SHA256 checksum for each released archive 
* If the plugin has external dependencies, plugin publisher MUST include them in the archive
* License file is optional but it's recommended to be included in the archive

> * To avoid [ZIP bombs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zip_bomb), plugin archive file size is limited to less than 256 MiB. The sum of the extracted files is also limited to 256 MiB

Reviewer 4: I don't think we should mention this in the spec as the size is adjustable.

Author: Could you pls clarify why "the size is adjustable"?

For example, an archive of a Notation plugin `helloworld` for Linux AMD64 machine `notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.zip` includes these files:

```

> notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.tar.gz
```

> ├── notation-helloworld (must)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
├── notation-helloworld (required)
```

├── LICENSE (optional)

> └── Dependency file (optional)

Author: Dependency is not a REQUIRED file. I think it's okay to mark it as optional

> ### Package a plugin
> 
> Plugin publisher SHOULD follow these conventions to package and distribute plugin files:
> 
> * The file formats supported by Notation include `.zip`, `.tar.gz`, and single plugin executable file. It is highly recommended to package the single plugin executable file into an archive for installation security and efficiency consideration
> * Plugin executable file MUST follow the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}` 
> * Notation supports installing a plugin from an `https` URL or from a file in the filesystem
> * If the archive format is `.zip` or `.tar.gz`, there MUST be one and only one plugin executable file within each archive
> * Plugin publisher SHOULD provide SHA256 checksum for each released archive 
> * If the plugin has external dependencies, plugin publisher MUST include them in the archive
> * License file is optional but it's recommended to be included in the archive
> * To avoid [ZIP bombs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zip_bomb), plugin archive file size is limited to less than 256 MiB. The sum of the extracted files is also limited to 256 MiB
> 
> For example, an archive of a Notation plugin `helloworld` for Linux AMD64 machine `notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.zip` includes these files:
> 
> ```
> notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64
> ├── notation-helloworld (must)
> ├── LICENSE (optional)
> └── Dependency file (optional)
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Packaging Plugin for Distribution

Notation supports the installation of a plugin from an `https` URL or from a file in the filesystem. To support  the installation of plugin using `notation plugin install` commands, the plugin distributor must adhere to the following conventions:

1. Plugin executable file MUST follow the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}`
1. The plugin distribution format MUST be either .zip, .tar.gz, or a single plugin executable file.
1. If archive format is .zip or .tar.gz, there MUST be exactly one plugin executable file within the archive.
1. If the plugin has external dependencies, plugin publisher SHOULD include them in the archive
1. The plugin archive MAY contain License files. Also, it's recommended to include licenses in the archive.
1. Currently, Notation facilitates the installation of plugin executable files and archives, with a size limit of less than 256 MiB. Consequently, the plugin executable file and archive size MUST be less than 256 MiB. Note: Although users have the option to install plugins larger than 256 MiB, they will be unable to utilize the `notation plugin install` command in such cases.

For example, consider an archive of a Notation plugin  named `helloworld` developed for Linux AMD64 machine `notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64.zip` includes following files:
```shell
notation-helloworld_1.0.1_linux_amd64
├── notation-helloworld (must)
├── LICENSE             (optional)
└── dependencies        (optional)
```
```
* Zips are more vulnerable than executable binary (more complex, more attack vectors)
* Ideally for distribution, package (either archive or executable) must be signed (authenticity and integrity) but currently notation supports only integrity validation.

Author: Signing and verifying a plugin relies on the arbitrary file signing and verification support. We can add this until notation supports it in the next release.

> Notation will invoke plugins as executable, pass parameters using command line arguments, and use standard IO streams to pass request/response payloads. This mechanism is used as Go language (used to develop [Notation Go library](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-go)) does not have a [in built support](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/19282) to load and execute plugins that works across OS platforms. Other mechanisms like gRPC require every plugin to be implemented as a service/daemon.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Notation will invoke plugins as executable, pass parameters using command line arguments, and use standard IO streams to pass request/response payloads. 
```
I'm not sure the meaning of it. Currently, we don't use Go plugin package or gRPC.

> ### Package and distribute plugin file

Reviewer: It's better to give an overview about what is a plugin file, the recommendation for distribution with examples, and then some specific conventions. For example,

A Notation plugin file is an executable file with the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}`. The plugin file can be distributed as a single executable file. However, it is highly recommended to package the plugin file in an archive file with compression. Plugin vendor may add other files in the same compressed archive file. The following is an example of the layout of the compressed archive file:

```
- notation-{plugin-name}.tar.gz
   - notation-{plugin-name}
   - LICENSE 
```

Then the detailed conventions (My draft language)
- On Linux, the plugin file should be executable with file permission `rx`. On Windows, it should be `.exe` as the file extension.
- the archived and compressed file can be a `zip` file or `tar.gz` file
- Only one executable file is supported in the archived and compressed file
- Other files are optional, such as LICENSE
- Plugin provider should provide a sha256sum of the file that users get, it can be the sha256sum of the plugin executable file if distributed via a single file directly, or sha256sum of the archived and compressed file.

Author: There is a terminology section above so I added an overview in that section. I also added an example layout structure accordingly.

> ### Package and distribute plugin file

Author: This paragraph is not for the plugin release process, it's only for how to correctly package a plugin. Plugin release is much more complex and it varies from plugin vendors, external plugin release convention is not in Notation's scope.

I changed it to `Package a plugin`

To ensure plugin installation is compatible with Notation, plugin publisher SHOULD follow these conventions to package and distribute plugin files:

* `.zip`, `.tar.gz`, and single plugin executable file formats are supported by Notation. Plugin executable file MUST follow the naming convention `notation-{plugin-name}` 

> * Plugin publisher SHOULD distribute the plugin file with an `https` URL to enable install a plugin from a remote source, or provide an archive file to enable install a plugin from filesystem

Author: The intention of this sentence is to remind plugin publishers that Notation supports installing a plugin from an `https` URL or from a file in the filesystem, so they can distribute their plugin via these two methods. I updated this sentence to avoid confusion.

I agree with you that plugin installation is decided by users. But plugin vendors should be aware of these installation methods.

> * Plugin publisher SHOULD distribute the plugin file with an `https` URL to enable install a plugin from a remote source, or provide an archive file to enable install a plugin from filesystem

Author: In addition, some plugin vendors may not release their plugins publicly for some reasons.

* If multiple files are compressed in the `.zip` or `.tar.gz` file, there MUST be only one plugin executable file exists
* Plugin publisher SHOULD provide SHA256 checksum for each plugin file 
* If the plugin installation has external dependencies, plugin publisher MUST include them in the plugin package

> * License file is optional but it's recommended to be included in the plugin package

Author: I find the term `archive` is much more accurate than release/plugin package. See [Grafana doc](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/plugin-management/#install-a-packaged-plugin) as an example.

Would it be better to use `archive` as the term here?

### Plugin lifecycle management

#### Installation

Plugin publisher will provide instructions to download and install the plugin. Plugins intended for public distribution should also include instructions for users to verify the authenticity of the plugin.

##### Plugin installation methods

> Notation provides [plugin management](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/v1.1.0/specs/commandline/plugin.md) commands to install plugins from different sources including `https` URL and filesystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notation offers [plugin management](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/v1.1.0/specs/commandline/plugin.md) commands that allow users to install plugins from various sources, including `https` URL and filesystem.
```

* Must, where relevant, have appropriate OS "execute" permissions (e.g. Unix x bit set) for the current user.
* Must actually be executed successfully and when executed with the subcommand `get-plugin-metadata` must produce a valid JSON metadata (and nothing else) on its standard output (schema to be discussed later).

> #### Commands

Reviewer: Maybe we can keep this section and add a reference to the `notation plugin` CLI spec.

Author: Good point. I added it back.

* Must, where relevant, have appropriate OS "execute" permissions (e.g. Unix x bit set) for the current user.
* Must actually be executed successfully and when executed with the subcommand `get-plugin-metadata` must produce a valid JSON metadata (and nothing else) on its standard output (schema to be discussed later).

### Commands

> Notation commands to install, list, and uninstall Notation plugins. See [`notation plugin` CLI specification](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/v1.1.0/specs/commandline/plugin.md) for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notation provides various commands, including `install`, `list`, and `uninstall`, to manage plugin lifecycle. For more information, please refer to the [`notation plugin` CLI specification](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/v1.1.0/specs/commandline/plugin.md).
```
